Windows XP (stylized as Windowsxp and codenamed Whistler)[5] is a personal computer operating system that was
produced by Microsoft as part of the Windows NT family of operating systems. It was released to manufacturing
on August 24, 2001, and broadly released for retail sale on October 25, 2001. Development of Windows XP began
in the late 1990s as "Neptune", an operating system built on the Windows NT kernel which was intended specifically
for mainstream consumer use—an updated version of Windows 2000 was also originally planned for the business market.
However, in January 2000, both projects were shelved in favor of a single OS codenamed "Whistler", which would
serve as a single OS platform for both consumer and business markets. Windows XP was a major advance from the
MS-DOS based versions of Windows in security, stability and efficiency[6] due to its use of Windows NT underpinnings.
It introduced a significantly redesigned graphical user interface and was the first version of Windows to use product
activation in an effort to reduce its copyright infringement. Upon its release, Windows XP received generally positive
reviews, with critics noting increased performance (especially in comparison to Windows ME), a more intuitive user
interface, improved hardware support, and its expanded multimedia capabilities.[7] Despite some initial concerns over
the new licensing model and product activation system, Windows XP eventually proved to be popular and widely used. It
is estimated that at least 400 million copies of Windows XP were sold globally within its first five years of
availability,[8][9] and at least one billion copies were sold by April 2014.[10] Sales of Windows XP licenses to
original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) ceased on June 30, 2008, but continued for netbooks until October 2010.
Windows XP remained popular even after the release of newer versions, particularly due to the poorly received release
of its successor Windows Vista. Vista's 2009 successor, Windows 7, only overtook XP in total market share at the end
of 2011.[11] Extended support for Windows XP ended on April 8, 2014, after which the operating system ceased receiving
further support or security updates to most users. As of November 2016, Windows XP desktop market share makes it the
fourth most popular Windows version after Windows 7, Windows 10 and Windows 8.1. Windows XP is still very popular in
some countries; Africa as a whole and in Asia, e.g. in China, with it running on one third of desktop computers (and
highest ranked in North Korea[12][13]).